Introduction
In this lesson, you are going to learn about using contrast to create appealing, intuitive, and accessible designs.
Contrast is one of the main tools designers have to draw people’s attention to parts of the site that they want to highlight, and make sure that their site is accessible to people with vision impairments.
There are a wide variety of users with vision impairments that use their sight to navigate the web. This includes people with low vision and color blindness.
Designing with visual accessibility in-mind will drive you towards creating sites that are easier for everyone to read and navigate, whether or not they have a vision impairment.
For more background about what digital accessibility is and why it matters, check out this article on Digital Accessibility https://www.codecademy.com/article/what-is-digital-accessibility.
Press next when you are ready to get started!

Contrast
Contrast refers to the opposition of different properties (color, size, shape, font, etc) to make one object visually distinct from another.
Careful use of contrast will aid all users in skimming or navigating our pages, by directing our user’s attention, and by visually communicating what is most important and what is not as important.
Making sure that enough contrast exists between different elements can help us ensure that our site is accessible to users with vision impairments.
In this lesson, we will cover creating accessibility-enhancing contrast through:
Headings
Font choices
Color
You will apply these principles to fix the “Creamy Chocolate Cupcakes” website so that it has a more accessible and more attractive design, with a more judicious use of contrast.
Press next when you are ready to continue.

Introduction to Headings
Text is used differently on the web than it is in a book. 
Users are often trying to navigate websites as quickly as possible.
Breaking large chunks of text into different sections that have their own headings and subheadings is essential to helping them find the content that they are looking for.
In HTML, there are six heading elements, <h1> - <h6>. 
The heading elements decrease in importance and size as the heading number increases. 
This means that an <h1> carries a higher rank than an <h6>.
Heading elements in HTML accomplish several things:
they create structure, dividing your page into groups of increasingly specific content
they create visual contrast, with lower-numbered headers like h1 displaying in a larger and more striking format
they provide navigation and contextual information to web browsers, plugins, and assistive technologies like screen readers.
As an added benefit, having a keyword in an h1 tag will typically impact search results more than having the same keyword in a p tag, because it is assumed that words used in your main heading are very important to the topic of your entire website.

Headings Hierarchy
Heading elements should be used in order and it is considered best practice not to skip heading elements when possible.
Let’s take a look at an example:
<h1>Main Site Header</h1>
<section>
  <h2>Section Header</h2>
</section>
<section>
  <h2>Section Header</h2>
  <h3>Section Sub-Header</h3>
</section>    
<footer>
  <h2>Footer Header</h2>
</footer>
In this example, we have one main site heading. 
This content uses the <h1> element and is assigned the highest rank as it is the most important. 
Note that each web page should only contain one <h1> element.
This <h1> is considered the label for the entire document and it should clearly define the purpose of the web page. 
After that, we use the <h2> element to assign the same level of importance to each sibling section.
This provides our users with a clean and consistent level of hierarchy when viewing our websites and also conforms to today’s web standards by providing a clear content outline.
Let’s apply what you’ve learned about headings to improve the “Creamy Chocolate Cupcakes” site.

Font Accessibility
Text Accessibility
Highly accessible websites use real text instead of images of text, use text with high contrast with its background, and choose highly legible font sizes.
Let’s dive into each of these concepts a bit more.
Real text vs text within images
Using real text instead of text within graphics provides a website with several key benefits:
screen readers can transform the text into a voice-over
users can scale or magnify the text for better legibility without losing image quality
it’s less taxing on the browser to load real text versus requesting large image assets from a server.
Contrasting colors
Text is much easier to read when there is a high level of contrast between the text and the text’s background color. 
According to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, a ratio of at least 4.5:1 should be used on all standard text sizes. 
This means the lighter color must have four and a half times the luminance of its paired darker color.
Readability can be preserved with less contrast for larger font sizes, 24 pixels or larger. 
A ratio of at least 3:1 should be used for larger text sizes.
Interested in testing a set of colors to see if they pass the WCAG’s guidelines? 
Head over to WebAIM https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/ and use their color contrast checker.
Font sizes
Lastly, we need to consider setting proper font sizes on our websites. 
The standard font size for most modern web browsers is 16 pixels. 
This allows users to scan your website and consume information without straining their eyes. 
While smaller type sizes can be used, they should be reserved for nonessential content or design aesthetic only.

Color Accessibility
When using color in our designs, it’s important to note the contrast between elements in the foreground and those in the background.
Sufficient color contrast can improve the usability of your site for users with low vision or color blindness.
For instance, using the combination of black (#00000) as a foreground color and white (#ffffff) as a background color provides maximum contrast.
While this is a fairly common color combination for text on a page, the high contrast can also cause glare that will increase strain on the user’s eyes over time.
On the other hand, using colors that are too similar, or lacking adequate contrast, can hinder users from being able to comprehend the content on the screen.
Let’s explore how users perceive colors, and how we can effectively make decisions on what colors to use to reduce issues with legibility.

Color Blindness
A user with color blindness has a reduced ability to differentiate between colors. 
In general, about 8% of men and 0.5% of women have a color vision deficiency.
Designing color combinations for color-blind users can enhance the overall impact it will have on everyone visiting your site.
There are many forms of color blindness. 
The most common is red-green color blindness, where those two colors are often indistinguishable. 
For instance, if a red-green colorblind user is looking at the color purple, it may appear blue as they do not perceive the red pigment.
People can also have blue-yellow color vision deficiency, and total color blindness, however, these affect a much smaller percentage of the population.
Here are some practical steps you can take to improve the color accessibility of your design:
Choosing highly contrasting colors (opposite from each other on a color wheel) will aid users with partial color blindness.
Using a color scheme with multiple shades of brightness for a single color will create contrast for users with partial or total color blindness. 
Think about how it would look in grayscale: light blue would still be differentiable from dark blue.
Pairing color with other forms of conveying information (text, icons, etc) is the most general solution. 
For example, an invalid entry in a form on a website should not just turn the entry field red, it should also display text that explains the error.
Color is a valuable tool for conveying information, but it should never be the only tool that your site uses to communicate any essential content.
Toptal https://www.toptal.com/designers/colorfilter has created a colorblind web page filter tool to test your designs with different types of color blindness.
Let’s take a look at some best practices of applying accessibility features to core components in design.

Best Practices
New web design trends come and go, and many times they are aesthetically appealing, but they are not always the most usable or accessible.
You now know enough principles of accessibility and usability to be able to judge if these trends will create problems for your users. 
Let’s reason through a few examples.
Text Overlaid on Images
White text overlaid on an image is a popular design trend. 
However, it doesn’t adhere to standards as the contrast is often too low. 
Adding a dark transparent overlay on top of the image could increase the contrast and provide better legibility.
Removing Input Labels
Another trend often seen in web design is the removal of labels above input fields, sometimes relying on placeholder text instead to identify the input field.
While this enhances the aesthetic quality of a design in some instances, it can hinder a user’s ability to identify which input they are attempting to fill out. 
This is particularly true for low vision users because the placeholder text is often light gray and low contrast. 
This also creates problems for users employing screen readers, because the form’s placeholder text is not always narrated.
Buttons and Links
There has been a trend towards flat and minimal design https://www.nngroup.com/articles/flat-design/ in recent years. 
This trend has improved usability in some ways, as it has encouraged designers to remove visual effects that are not contributing to the usability of their site.
However, minimalism can go too far, especially if it obscures how users should navigate the site. 
Visual contrast is especially important for buttons and links because these are the tools our users employ to navigate. 
Color alone should not be used to indicate clickability, as this will cause challenges for low vision and color-blind users.
Taking into consideration color choices, contrast, and font legibility will help you evaluate new design trends, and reduce the chance of new designs introducing accessibility barriers.

Review
Congratulations! You made the cupcake recipe site look much better! You practiced some new CSS syntax, and you learned the power of visual contrast, for both overall design, and for accessibility.
You gained some knowledge on web accessibility and how to make your websites usable for all users.
Remember, the keys to building a more visually inclusive Web are:
Using contrast so our text and colors provide better visual cues
Using correct font size so our content is legible
Creating user interfaces that are enhanced by, but not dependent on, color
Following these guidelines can increase the usability of our websites. In the next lesson, you will learn semantic HTML tags, which improve the accessibility of sites for people using a screen reader.