Visual rules
Font family
h1 {
  font-family: Garamond;
}
In the example above, the font family for all main heading elements has been set to Garamond.
When setting typefaces on a web page, keep the following points in mind:
The font specified must be installed on the user’s computer or downloaded with the site.
Web safe fonts are a group of fonts supported across most browsers and operating systems.
Unless you are using web safe fonts, the font you choose may not appear the same between all browsers and operating systems.
When the name of a typeface consists of more than one word, it’s a best practice to enclose the typeface’s name in quotes, like so:
h1 {
  font-family: 'Courier New';
}

Font size
To change the size of text on your web page, you can use the font-size property.
p {
  font-size: 18px;
}

Font weight
In CSS, the font-weight property controls how bold or thin text appears.
p {
  font-weight: bold;
}
The font-weight property has another value: normal. Why does it exist?
If we wanted all text on a web page to appear bolded, we could select all text elements and change their font weight to bold. 
If a certain section of text was required to appear normal, however, we could set the font weight of that particular element to normal, essentially shutting off bold for that element.

Text align
To align text we can use the text-align property. 
The text-align property will align text to the element that holds it, otherwise known as its parent.
h1 {
  text-align: right;
}
The text-align property can be set to one of the following commonly used values:
left — aligns text to the left side of its parent element, which in this case is the browser.
center — centers text inside of its parent element.
right — aligns text to the right side of its parent element.
justify— spaces out text in order to align with the right and left side of the parent element.

Color and background color
Color can affect the following design aspects:
Foreground color
Background color
In CSS, these two design aspects can be styled with the following two properties:
color: this property styles an element’s foreground color
background-color: this property styles an element’s background color
h1 {
  color: red;
  background-color: blue;
}

Opacity
Opacity is the measure of how transparent an element is. 
It’s measured from 0 to 1, with 1 representing 100%, or fully visible and opaque, and 0 representing 0%, or fully invisible.
Opacity can be used to make elements fade into others for a nice overlay effect. 
To adjust the opacity of an element, the syntax looks like this:
.overlay {
  opacity: 0.5;
}
In the example above, the .overlay element would be 50% visible, letting whatever is positioned behind it show through.

Background image
CSS has the ability to change the background of an element. One option is to make the background of an element an image. This is done through the CSS property background-image. Its syntax looks like this:
.main-banner {
  background-image: url('https://www.example.com/image.jpg');
}
The background-image property will set the element’s background to display an image.
The value provided to background-image is a url. 
The url should be a URL to an image. 
The url can be a file within your project, or it can be a link to an external site. 
To link to an image inside an existing project, you must provide a relative file path. 
If there was an image folder in the project, with an image named mountains.jpg, the relative file path would look like below:
.main-banner {
  background-image: url('images/mountains.jpg');
}

Important
!important can be applied to specific declarations, instead of full rules. 
It will override any style no matter how specific it is. 
As a result, it should almost never be used. Once !important is used, it is very hard to override.
The syntax of !important in CSS looks like this:
p {
  color: blue !important;
}
 
.main p {
  color: red;
}
Since !important is used on the p selector’s color attribute, all p elements will appear blue, even though there is a more specific .main p selector that sets the color attribute to red.
One justification for using !important is when working with multiple stylesheets. 
For example, if we are using the Bootstrap CSS framework and want to override the styles for one specific HTML element, we can use the !important property.

Review Visual Rules
Incredible work! You used CSS to alter text and images on a website. 
Throughout this lesson, you learned concepts including:
The font-family property defines the typeface of an element.
font-size controls the size of text displayed.
font-weight defines how thin or thick text is displayed.
The text-align property places text in the left, right, or center of its parent container.
Text can have two different color attributes: color and background-color. color defines the color of the text, while background-color defines the color behind the text.
CSS can make an element transparent with the opacity property.
CSS can also set the background of an element to an image with the background-image property.
The !important flag will override any style, however it should almost never be used, as it is extremely difficult to override.
https://youtu.be/InA5Ff7mxrc