foreground vs background
h1 {
  color: red;
  background-color: blue;
}

hexadecimal
A hex color begins with a hash character (#) which is followed by three or six characters. 
The characters represent values for red, blue and green.

darkseagreen: #8FBC8F
sienna:       #A0522D
saddlebrown:  #8B4513
brown:        #A52A2A
black:        #000000 or #000
white:        #FFFFFF or #FFF
aqua:         #00FFFF or #0FF
In the example above, you may notice that there are both letters and numbers in the values. 
This is because the hexadecimal number system has 16 digits (0-15) instead of 10 (0-9) like in the standard decimal system. 
To represent 10-15, we use A-F. 
Here is a list of many different colors and their hex values.

Notice that black, white, and aqua are all represented with both three characters and six characters. 
This can be done with hex colors whose number pairs are the same characters. 
In the example above, aqua can be represented as #0FF because both of the first two characters are 0 and the second and third pairs of characters are both Fs. 
Keep in mind that all three character hex colors can be represented with six characters (by repeating each character twice) but the same is not true in reverse.

You can include hex colors just as you would include named colors: background-color: #9932cc;, and the letters can be uppercase or lowercase.

rgb colors
h1 {
  color: rgb(23, 45, 23);
}
Each of the three values represents a color component, and each can have a decimal number value from 0 to 255. 
The first number represents the amount of red, the second is green, and the third is blue. 
These colors are exactly the same as hex, but with a different syntax and a different number system.

In general, hex and RGB color representations are equivalent. 
Which you choose is a matter of personal taste. 
That said, it’s good to choose one and be consistent throughout your CSS, because it’s easier to compare hex to hex and RGB to RGB.

hex and rgb
In both hex and RGB, we have three values, one for each color. Each can be one of 256 values. Specifically, 256 * 256 * 256 = 16,777,216. That is the amount of colors we can now represent. Compare that to the roughly 140 named CSS colors!

hue, saturation, and lightness
The RGB color scheme is convenient because it’s very close to how computers represent colors internally. 
There’s another equally powerful system in CSS called the hue-saturation-lightness color scheme, abbreviated as HSL.
color: hsl(120, 60%, 70%);
Hue is the first number. It refers to an angle on a color wheel. 
Red is 0 degrees, Green is 120 degrees, Blue is 240 degrees, and then back to Red at 360.

Saturation refers to the intensity or purity of the color. 
The saturation increases towards 100% as the color becomes richer. 
The saturation decreases towards 0% as the color becomes grayer.

Lightness refers to how light or dark the color is. 
Halfway, or 50%, is normal lightness. Imagine a sliding dimmer on a light switch that starts halfway. 
Sliding the dimmer up towards 100% makes the color lighter, closer to white. 
Sliding the dimmer down towards 0% makes the color darker, closer to black.

HSL is convenient for adjusting colors. 
In RGB, making the color a little darker may affect all three color components. 
In HSL, that’s as easy as changing the lightness value. 
HSL is also useful for making a set of colors that work well together by selecting various colors that have the same lightness and saturation but different hues.

opacity and alpha
All of the colors we’ve seen so far have been opaque, or non-transparent. 
When we overlap two opaque elements, nothing from the bottom element shows through the top element. 
In this exercise, we’ll change the opacity, or the amount of transparency, of some colors so that some or all of the bottom elements are visible through a covering element.

To use opacity in the HSL color scheme, use hsla instead of hsl, and four values instead of three. 
For example:

color: hsla(34, 100%, 50%, 0.1);
The first three values work the same as hsl. 
The fourth value (which we have not seen before) is the alpha. 
This last value is sometimes called opacity.

Alpha is a decimal number from zero to one. 
If alpha is zero, the color will be completely transparent. 
If alpha is one, the color will be opaque. 
The value for half-transparent would be 0.5.

You can think of the alpha value as, “the amount of the background to mix with the foreground”. 
When a color’s alpha is below one, any color behind it will be blended in. 
The blending happens for each pixel; no blurring occurs.

The RGB color scheme has a similar syntax for opacity, rgba. 
Again, the first three values work the same as rgb and the last value is the alpha. 
Here’s an example:

color: rgba(234, 45, 98, 0.33);
A little unconventional, but still worth mentioning is how hex colors can also have an alpha value. 
By adding a two-digit hexadecimal value to the end of the six-digit representation (#52BC8280), or a one-digit hexadecimal value to the end of the three-digit representation (#F003), you can change the opacity of a hexadecimal color. 
Hex opacity ranges from 00 (transparent) to FF (opaque).

Alpha can only be used with HSL, RGB, and hex colors; we cannot add the alpha value to name colors like green.

There is, however, a named color keyword for zero opacity, transparent. 
It’s equivalent to rgba(0, 0, 0, 0), and it’s used like any other color keyword:

color: transparent;